reunited at last mother sees her chick
for the first time she's keen to start
parenting but the father needs
persuading to surrender the chick he's
been caring for all winter he must now
put his chick at risk in these
temperatures it could freeze in seconds
the male will have to let go
eventually the transfer to the mother is
safely made
[Music]
the chicks grow quickly on a diet of
fish and squid
[Music]
soon they're keen to explore their
always with mother in terror
this chick is less fortunate its mother
has not returned to claim it another
orphan is searching for a new family but
this female already has a chick of her
own some orphans receive too much
mothering from penguins whose own chicks
have not survived the urge to parent is
so strong that they will compete with
one another to adopt any chick they find
many of these squabbles end in tragedy
as the portrait is trampled to death
those chicks that do have parents
quickly learn survival skills even in
spring they must huddle together for
warmth
just as their fathers did in the depths
of winter
a group of chicks has got lost in the
blizzard cold and disorientated they
search for the colony
[Music]
it will not be long before the storm
claims its first victims
[Music]
by early summer the chicks are
surprisingly well-developed
and now look ready to take on the world
those that survive their first year have
the best possible start in life thanks
to the extraordinary hardships endured
by their parents parents who battled
with the Antarctic winter and won for an
idea of the scale for the super giant
we're here to find I've got a selection
of skulls this one belongs to a black
bear and these are found right here in
California but it's totally dwarfed by
this one this is a grizzly bear and the
canine teeth on this one are about as
long as my thumb this is in the record
books as being the largest land predator
on earth so this gargantuan skull must
surely come from some prehistoric
dinosaur a saber-toothed cat perhaps
well actually this super giant is
anything but extinct in fact they're
increasing in number they're said to be
over 150 thousand of them and the best
place to see them is on the beach just
over there
[Music]
these are elephant seals it's pretty
obvious where the name comes from
maybe that size the skin and that
extraordinary nose they do just look
like swimming elephants elephant seals
are the biggest seals on the planet the
largest can be 6 metres long and a
whopping 4 tonnes
I want to see for myself why elephant
seals have become super Giants it's
important to respect their personal
space elephant seals rarely cross paths
with people but when they do they can
really throw their weight around up here
on land they're impossibly ungainly and
out of place elephant seals there's
still one part of their life they come
here to give birth right and to find a
man it's the male elephant seals that
are the real super Giants there are over
three times heavier than females the
males have to fight for mates the bigger
they are the better their chances of
success thanks to scientists from the
University of California Santa Cruz I
can get hands-on with one to see how
it's equipped for battle he's been
sedated while the team attached a radio
transmitter
that's remarkable as the animals
breathing you can hear the air
resonating around that if you need to
know you can feel the vibrations coming
up through the ground
it's like someone revving a big
motorbike right next to you inside that
mouth a full canine teeth look a little
bit like that particularly the two on
the lower jaw are angled forward like
this and can be used in a stabbing
motion if that was propelled at me I
wouldn't last a second in the tropical
forests of New Guinea one male is
dedicated to making an unforgettable
first impression the six proved bird of
paradise is cleaning his display ground
he obsessively tied is every fallen leaf
his stage must be meticulously tidy for
what will be an incredible performance a
few attractive berries to help decorate
the floor
this final touch is hardly ever seen
might he think he's found a bit of old
snakeskin some scientists believe he's
trying to add the scent of a snake to
ward off predators for others it's a
cleaning cloth and he's polishing a
perch for a female
later he uses a bigger bit of rag and
does the same only strong healthy and
well-fed males can afford the time and
effort for the most meticulous
preparation and in theory they're the
ones with better genes to pass on you
have a highly critical audience so it's
time to rehearse the main act
[Music]
his dance steps perfected he's ready to
start the show for real he spots a
female nearby so quickly goes to get
more berries to tempt her in disaster
he's left his polishing rag on the dance
floor it's perfect for her nest she
flies off without even seeing his dance
he delivers his berries too late he
never got a chance to win her heart and
he lost his precious polishing cloth
back to work Spinosaurus is a predator
but one that hunts in water
it's xeo failures of fish eater
this is uncle priestess an eight meter
long giant saw fish similar to those
alive today the so like rostrum is lined
with lethal Barb's
and is in itself up to two and a half
meters in length
it's thought they migrated into
freshwater rivers to breed where the
young may be safer but the adults are
exposed to new threats
[Music]
with their breeding season at its height
these rivers are filled with anka
priestess
it's the perfect hunting opportunity for
Spinosaurus
[Music]
Spinosaurus is conical teeth evolved to
grip prey rather than tear off flesh for
that it needs powerful arms and claws
[Music]
with prey plentiful spinosaurus can
afford to be wasteful fact which other
dinosaurs take full advantage of
Bruegel's an 8 meter carnivore
anywhere else it might dominate but here
it is dwarfed by Spinosaurus
Spinosaurus is unique with long narrow
jaws and nostrils set high on its head
its teeth was straight and conical they
gave us a clue as to how it killed more
evidence came in 2008 when Spinosaurus
skull was put through a CT scanner it
revealed a curious pattern of holes and
sinuses in the snout that looked just
like those of crocodiles
it's thought these contain pressure
sensors sensors that like a crocodile
can detect prey making it perfectly
adapted to hunting in water
[Music]
this discovery gives us our best
evidence of exactly how it hunted
able to hold its snout in the water
because of its high nostrils it can
strike without even seeing its prey
[Music]
the character of the forest changes as
additionally becoming ever darker and
damper favoring different kinds of
animals and plants less than 2% of the
sunlight reaches the floor but even here
there is extraordinary variety in the
great island of New Guinea there are 42
different species of birds-of-paradise
each more bizarre of the month
[Music]
this forest is so rich that nourishing
food can be gathered very quickly that
leaves the male six-plumed
bird-of-paradise with time to
concentrate on other matters like
tidying up his display area everything
must be and span there they impress
it but no one is watching the superb
bird-of-paradise caused to attract a
female and he has more luck but what
does he have to do to really impress her
[Music]
she retires to consider her verdict it's
hard not to feel deflated when even your
best isn't good enough
the time when both egg and the brooding
parent are permanently at risk
[Music]
smaller over Raptors are no more than a
nuisance
larger predators are a different story
I'm willing to leave the nest with a dog
protect its offspring first by hiding
and if that fails it goes on the
offensive
[Music]
protecting the nest means Giganta
raptors young are more likely to survive
it now seems clear that the instinct to
nurture and care for a nest of eggs had
its origins with the dinosaurs it's a
behavior that was so successful it's
still widespread today with birds but
the fossils show something else these
animals all died sitting on their nests
[Music]
it seems that the threats don't always
come from predators sometimes the real
danger comes from the most unlikely
places
[Music]
these dinosaurs were all buried alive at
a jungle hut this female finds a soul
despite being totally wild somehow she
has worked out what to do with it like
us Iranians have an opposable thumb that
allows them to grasp and handle objects
with precision over 20 years ago
a rescue orangutan learned how to solve
by watching people constructing the huts
here but this is a totally different and
wild orangutan she seems to take pride
in her work even clearing away the
sawdust she's so smart she uses her feet
was a vice to steady the branch filming
a wild born and free living orangutan
mastering this complex task is
remarkable but no she's not the only
orangutan sawing
spy orangutan has joined her
[Music]
it seems to be bringing out a
competitive streak he's becoming even
more enthusiastic
[Music]
but for a novice sewing is tiring work
she's lost all momentum
[Music]
then finally calls ER today spy
orangutan may have machine-like stamina
but it's the astonishing and versatile
mind of the real orangutan that's one
the day she certainly earned her rest to
help her in her quest she's equipped
with three super powers first an amazing
approach to getting about Portia is a
jumping spider
able to leap up to 50 times around body
length
[Music]
nowhere seems beyond her reach
next a second superpower supervised
sight essential if sees to distinguish
her prey in all this cutter because her
prey doesn't stray Portia is a spider
eating spider this raises a few problems
her lunch is three times as Sunny's
packed with venom and surrounded by a
sticky trap
mission impossible not at all because of
her third superpower Portia is a genius
she can map her world in three
dimensions and formulate a plan of
attack
[Music]
she can have an idea
the web builder is blind it won't have a
clue that she's coming
[Music]
right on target and safely behind those
fangs but a mind as active as Portia's
can always do with more brain food here
there's no anchor point for the abseil
but Porsche has another idea instead of
going to the spider
[Music]
she will bring the spider to her she
plucks the strands to imitate struggling
prey drawing the spider in to its death
[Music]
their cover blown
escape cheese impossible
but these particular fish have a unique
ability
[Music]
they're flying fish
[Applause]
[Music]
with the next two thrusts from their
tails
the flying fish get airborne once more
with a good wind they can guide for
hundreds of meters
but this is just what the frigate birds
have been waiting for
[Music]
when frigates join the hunt the flying
fish are literally caught between devil
and the deep blue sea
[Music]
if the flying fish get too much lift
they become easy prey for the frigates
[Music]
[Applause]
if they dive to evade attacks from above
[Music]
they could fall into the mouths of the
Dorado
[Music]
[Applause]
the perfect launch
and a control drop this is as good a
descent as it's possible to make
[Music]
it's parents are there to meet it
a little dazed
perhaps but all in one piece one Gosling
at least hasn't made it
[Music]
and this chick appears to be in a bad
way
[Music]
at last it responds to its mother's
calls the resilience of a barnacle goose
chip that is extraordinary but there are
still chicks unaccounted for somewhere
amongst the rubble
[Music]
the parents can't risk searching because
they need to lead their two survivors
away quickly before predators arrive
[Music]
the third one has made it
but it needs to catch up
[Music]
reunited
three out of five chicks have made it
without such a dramatic start in life
it's unlikely any of you would have even
got this far
[Music]